---
title: "1984"
description: "Ever imagined how life would be, if there's hyper control of State, such that even your thoughts are Monitored. George Orwell's 1984 delves upon that hoarrowing scenario, it feels like reading the future trajectory of hyper State control or is it current?"
image: "/images/19844.jpg"
category: "Books"
author: "Maurya"
type: "Dystopian Fiction"
date: "2025-06-08T16:21:00+05:30"
---

## Summary:
Winston felt living in the world of Oceania, with the principle of Ingsoc, Under the watch of Big Brother, he felt that living under this condition is quite soulless. Being in Constant watch, to put constant efforts for fitting into society made him feel that they lost the most essential aspect of freedom.

As in this chaos, he found a new sense of purpose in writing the details in a dairy, his consistent effort to write the diary secretly explains his enthusiasm for freedom and his rebellious nature against the Party that is deep down in him. He believed that the proles who are worker class of the Society are the only hope in the rebellion against the Party and to bring back freedom.

Winston felt that O’Brien might also be having the hatred towards party, This feeling of Winston conveys that he is truly turning into a rebel that is just looking for a companion to take the next step. Then he meets Julia, and they both form a secret relationship.

The common trait of rebellion, though in different ways, of Julia and Winston might have helped them in forming a strong liking to each other. All the while they stayed together, they have contemplated the ideas of freedom and the reason for being free in first place

Winston argued that, Fighting for freedom is an absolute necessity for being Human. Even Julia agreed with this, So their common passion for freedom is clearly evident, at this point they have been mostly detached from the society they are living. He even went to polish their passion by making it more meaningful with the point that, even if their efforts go vain in changing anything, it would remain as fossils of attempts for the next generations to come, so that they can take over their Will.

Later they pledged to O’Brien that they are going to any extent for actualising their Will to Freedom. But it turned out that O’Brien was working on the side of party and betrayed them by making them get caught. When they got caught in the room, where they made a stay for long time, it is evident that whatever life they lived till them it is all a Lie from the shopkeeper Charington who is actually a thought police to the portrait on the wall which is actually a tele-screen.

Even after this Winston and Julia did not lose their Spirit, they stood strong to it, especially Winston, he blatantly rejected the idea of party and made a firm stand against it. O’Brien and Party through their torture techniques tried in every way to break his spirit. They mostly succeeded but there’s still a bit of Rebellion left in Him in a form of Love towards Julia

In the process O’Brien explains the motive of Party, and it is nothing but pure Power, there is no ulterior motive for their actions except for Power, it is not the power of individual or power of group but of Party, they themselves are just a minute part of Party. This indicates that why are in the thought that they have cracked the code of Power, by associating Power with people or ideology, They have failed in past, but by associating the Power itself as end and everyone else including themselves as Means they got hold of Power for long time. 

At last they sent him to a Room, where the torture procedure includes a specific object or aspect that was truly terrifying to that particular individual who is brought to get tortured, this information they could have realised through the secret psychological study of that individual. In that final procedure the Party was successful in breaking that last bit, as Winston shouted that he wishes to pass this torture to Julia, which is nothing but a betrayal to his love.

## The Parallels I Found:
1. ### Society:
   1. #### Totalitarian Socialism: 
      1. Prima Facie, the Society of Oceania and the Government appears to be Totalitarian Socialism, similar to the Stalin’s era of USSR, where there is strict censorship, less freedom and manipulation of people’s minds, in fact it seems to be a direct social commentary on Stalin with Big Brother figure and USSR with Oceania
   2. #### Totalitarian Capitalism:
      1. This is my personal feeling that Capitalism in recent times been a strong hold of very few, take in case of India where 1% people are holding the 40% of wealth. It is only possible for a very small amount to hold such huge amount and it is through Power, without Power capitalism will be enabling every aspiring Capitalists, but with Power, Capitalism will be a game of very few. Like how inner party and outer party exchange themselves, some become enough wealthy but not powerful wealthy that are already holding power. Here the circle of Proles is very huge with different attractive Jobs and different lifestyle obsessions and consumptions. The Elite of Power and Capital varies according to the region, In India is the top 1%, In World it is the combined group of elite capitalists mostly from America, These Power Capitalists know no Religion, Caste, Region, Nationality, all they speak in the language of Money and Power.  You can see this evident where the Capitalist society favours all the elite people like Business men, Bureaucrats, Politicians and alike. Here Power is not with a Individual or Particular Group but with Idea and the few people who hold that Idea which is Capitalism, there they join to make people numb, but in Totalitarian Capitalism we have consumer products like Media, Cars, what not.., All that Capitalists want is not to disturb the order of Capitalism, though they care about competition, it is all one on one battle, but when it comes to the fact that anyone wanted to shake the capitalist system, all of them would gather and crush the rebellion.
2. ### Characters:
   1. Winston and Julia: They were seem to be parallels to the ambitious Youth who are dreaming of Utopia
   2. O’Brien: Seem to be the parallel of compromised Rebel who see no escape but Freedom in Surrender
3. In a way 1984 is commentary on the Power Hungry Society, irrespective if it is Socialist or Capitalist

## Themes discussed by readers(Unsolicited Advice):
1. ### The Impersistence of Memory: 
   We as per biology are not the same organisms physically, as every cell in our body would replace after a time, we continue to be us in a sense, only because of our memories that add a personality or essence to our body. Without the past we will be in continuous present without personal identity. (Personal: This I feel evidently felt with the Mandela Effect, It blurs our perception of existence and reality, Our identity is what we shaped through Past and the past we remember as memories), this is where the State of Oceania tries to alter the past, pushing the subjects in continuous dissonance with their memories and identity. Making them lose their sense of self. (John Locke: It is your Past Memories that makes you who you are, If a person genuinely lost their memories then they are not that person anymore) 
2. ### Language and Thought: 
   It is through Language our Thoughts get shaped, it is only when you know a Word related to your thought, only then you could contemplate more on that thought. “What we could speak about has the huge bearing on what we could think about”. So the Party limit the thoughts of subject by limiting the vocabulary that can be used by them. It is not just limiting the vocabulary, the party altogether brought a new language in the name of Newspeak. Where the vocabulary is designed in such a way that the language only exists till the point of being in favour with the Party, if the language is being unfavourable towards the party then the vocabulary, that is making language unfavourable to party is discarded. They might not even formulate the phrase: “I want to overthrow Party”
3. ### Transferring Passion towards Party from the usual Human Values: 
   The Value towards Parents, Partner, or Children is vanishing in the novel, where the passion exists towards the Party and Big brother, so they act as spies against everyone though the ones are thieves family members. In torture of Winston we can see they treat their passion as sick
4. ### Abolition of privacy: 
   “Personal is Political” instead of using for benevolent outcome, it is used for party power
5. ### Deathless Drive: 
   We feel it more meaningful to work for the eternal, as we could live through it. But this Work for Eternal might make us do anything for that eternal. In 1984 the Inner Party members chose Party as their eternal form. “Individual thinkers appear as non cohesive to the society, but at same time ones who are deindividualised can be threat to the society, without individual conscience and identifying themselves as part of an organisation could be going to extremities of injustice. 
6. ### Empty Joy or Painful truth: 
   Pushing the Psyche to such extent where suffering itself seems pointless, living upto ideal become meaningless, in such mindset the ones that provide you relief or pleasure seems to be the saviours
7. ### Helplessness and Hopelessness: 
   The down to earth and more physical helplessness is experienced by people in 1984, Proles are kept at perpetual poverty so they don’t pile up the will to change things, Outer Party members are affluent enough to think, but here comes the thought police, Inner Party members are more affluent and enjoy better privileges but they are also under constant watch, At same time this helpless situation makes it more hopeless as none of the group will be saviour another. 

   But even Party will succumb to hopelessness eventually as when they accomplish their goal of complete power, there’s nothing left for more power, so there’s no hope left for anything, just living and decaying. 

   (**But In my personal opinion**: The very act of Hate Speech creates a suspicions in Minds of People whether if the Goldstein is right, and this could lead them fall into the Ploy of Brotherhood and eventually under the hands of Thought police, so the Hate Speech and whole existence of Goldstein and Brotherhood thing acts as a trigger to rebellious idea, Party is thinking that by creating Goldstein and Brotherhood they are transferring the passion in their lives to mere hate at same time finding the ones that don’t hate and cure them, but I feel this whole hate thing is the triggering point for the rebellious mindset of Subject, in a way Party is digging its own grave and filling it again)

8. ### What’s the Point of 1984: 
   It is  a commentary on how extreme a totalitarian government could go. Orwell himself commented that: “Every line of serious work that I have written since 1936 has been written directly or indirectly, against totalitarianism and for democratic socialism as I understand it.”
9. ### Philosophy of 1984 at personal Level: 
   BY looking into aspects that taken away by Party, we could get deeper insights into what truly matters to us: “the freedom to be unobserved”, “the sovereignty of what goes on between the walls of our skull”, “the ability to forge connection with others to craft our own linguistic expression”, “to have a clear agreed upon definition of truth that will not change day to day.” Dystopian fiction can help remind of everything that we take granted and put us on high alert against anything that would threaten these pillars of our joy. As Socrates describes: “In order to see what makes a virtuous person, it is helpful to ask what makes a virtuous state so that we examine these purported virtues on a larger scale”.
10. ### Finding Parallels of Big Brother in ourself: 
    There could be a big brother in us which is curtailing us from exploring the freedom of thought, from the freedom of expression, not with intention of politeness but with intention of treating such acts as thoughtcrime with respect to society. Where our inner critic acts as thought police, Society is the Party and our Image is the Big Brother?
11. ### The State is the people and the People are the State: 
    Aristotle says “The Virtues of the State and the Virtues of a citizen are inexorably linked” , if state is well run, the subject people have better opportunity to explore their values and potential, Same way if people are virtuous the State will be kept checked by the values of People and obviously it will be well administrated.
“The thought that we might one day be surrounded by the wreckage of all that we held dear helpless and hopeless in the face of an overwhelming force that none can now stand to resist with only the choice between nihilism and submission that is the existential horror of 1984” - Unsolicited Advice

### My Views: 
While reading what I felt is that the book ported how extreme the greed of Power could go, such that the thought of rebellion itself can be successfully crushed and the people continue to exist in a perpetual misery like the farm animals against their wishes within in the range of curtailed freedom.

